articles/cgbn.md, before:

# Conditional Gaussian Bayesian Networks Structure Learning

## Conditional Gaussian Bayesian network (CGBN)

A **Conditional Gaussian Bayesian Network (CGBN)** is a probabilistic
graphical model that integrates **discrete** and **continuous**
variables within a unified Bayesian framework, making it particularly
suitable for **mixed-type (mixture) data**.

**RSNet** implements a resampling-based structure learning framework for
CGBNs, supporting four resampling strategies to improve the stability
and robustness of inferred network structures:

1.  Bootstrap.
2.  Sub-sampling
3.  Stratified bootstrap.
4.  Stratified sub-sampling.

**IMPORTANT NOTE**: The Conditional Gaussian Bayesian Network
functionalities `ensemble_cgbn` and `consensus_net_cgbn` are optional in
**RSNet** and require the `RHugin` package. Installation instructions
for
[macOS](https://rhugin.r-forge.r-project.org/InstallingRHuginMacOSX.html),
[windows](https://rhugin.r-forge.r-project.org/InstallingRHuginWindows.html),
and
[Linux](https://rhugin.r-forge.r-project.org/InstallingRHuginLinux.html).

## Load packages

``` r
library(RSNet)
library(RHugin)
```

## Load a toy dataset

To illustrate the workflow, we use a simulated toy dataset containing
**20 continuous** and **5 discrete variables**, representing a
mixed-type dataset suitable for conditional Gaussian Bayesian network
analysis.

``` r
data("toy_cgbn")
```

## Run and learn an ensemble of networks from resampled datasets

In this example, we use the simulated dataset as input and perform
bootstrap resampling (`boot = TRUE`) with 3 iterations
(`num_iteration = 5`). The column names of the discrete variables must
be specified as a character vector in the `discrete_variable` argument.

To perform **subsampling** instead of **bootstrapping**, set
`boot = FALS`E and specify the sampling proportion using the `sub_ratio`
argument (a value between 0 and 1).

The function
[`ensemble_cgbn()`](https://montilab.github.io/RSNet/reference/ensemble_cgbn.md)
also supports parallel computing.

``` r
ensemble_toy <- ensemble_cgbn(dat = toy_cgbn, # A n x p dataframe
                              discrete_variable = sprintf("D%d",1:5), # Column names of the discreate variables
                              num_iteration = 3, # Number of resampling iteration
                              sample_class = NULL, # Optional: for stratified sampling
                              boot = TRUE, # If FALSE, perform sub-sampling
                              sub_ratio = 1, # Subsampling ratio (0–1)
                              n_cores = 1) # Number of cores for parallel computing
```

## Construct the consensus network

The construction of the **consensus network** for conditional Gaussian
Bayesian networks (CGBNs) supports two complementary approaches:

1.  `method = "all"`: Computes the selection frequency of each edge
    (i.e., the proportion of resampling iterations in which the edge is
    identified) with respect to a reference network (typically inferred
    using all samples). The resulting consensus network retains its
    directed structure.

2.  `method = "average"`: Computes the selection frequency of each edge
    based on Markov blanket relationships between the two incident
    nodes. The resulting consensus network is undirected, representing
    stable dependency patterns rather than directionality.

``` r
## Directed consensus network (method = "all")
## A simple way to generate a reference network is to set: num_iteration = 1, boot = FALSE, sub_ratio = 1
reference_network <- ensemble_cgbn(dat = toy_cgbn, 
                                   discrete_variable = sprintf("D%d",1:5), 
                                   num_iteration = 1, 
                                   sample_class = NULL, 
                                   boot = FALSE, 
                                   sub_ratio = 1, 
                                   n_cores = 1)

directed_cons_net <- consensus_net_cgbn(ensemble_toy$ig_networks, # A list of igraph objects
                                        reference_network = reference_network$ig_networks$iter_1, # An igraph object
                                        method="all", # Integration method
                                        cut = 0.5) # Edge weight threshold


## Markov blanket-based undirected consensus network, set `method="average" 
undirected_cons_net <- consensus_net_cgbn(ensemble_toy$ig_networks, # A list of igraph objects
                                          reference_network = NULL, # Not required for method = "average"
                                          method="average", # Integration method
                                          cut = 0.5) # Edge weight threshold
```

###

Commit message:

Deploying to gh-pages from @ montilab/RSNet@d75ec9412c8f64fff3a8550494a5d23384e8220a 🚀

articles/cgbn.md, after:

# Conditional Gaussian Bayesian Networks Structure Learning

## Introduction

A **Conditional Gaussian Bayesian Network (CGBN)** is a probabilistic
graphical model that integrates **discrete** and **continuous**
variables within a unified Bayesian framework, making it particularly
suitable for **mixed-type (mixture) data**. CGBNs are represented as
**directed acyclic graphs (DAGs)**, where nodes correspond to random
variables and directed edges encode conditional dependencies consistent
with a joint probability distribution in which continuous variables
follow Gaussian distributions conditional on their discrete parents.

Structure learning in CGBNs is typically performed using
**constraint-based methods**, which infer the network topology by
testing conditional independence relationships implied by the data.
Starting from a complete graph, edges are iteratively removed when
conditional independence between variable pairs is detected given
appropriate conditioning sets. A key step in orienting edges in the
resulting partially directed graph is the identification of
**v-structures**, of the form
$\left. X\rightarrow Z\leftarrow Y \right.$. A v-structures is inferred
when two variables $X$ and $Y$ are marginally independent but become
conditionally dependent upon conditioning on a third variable $Z$, as
illustrating in the follow figure:

**RSNet** implements a resampling-based structure learning framework for
CGBNs, supporting four resampling strategies to improve the stability
and robustness of inferred network structures:

1.  Bootstrap.
2.  Sub-sampling
3.  Stratified bootstrap.
4.  Stratified sub-sampling.

**IMPORTANT NOTE**: The Conditional Gaussian Bayesian Network
functionalities
[`ensemble_cgbn()`](https://montilab.github.io/RSNet/reference/ensemble_cgbn.md)
and
[`consensus_net_cgbn()`](https://montilab.github.io/RSNet/reference/consensus_net_cgbn.md)
are optional in **RSNet** and require the *RHugin* package. Installation
instructions for
[macOS](https://rhugin.r-forge.r-project.org/InstallingRHuginMacOSX.html),
[windows](https://rhugin.r-forge.r-project.org/InstallingRHuginWindows.html),
and
[Linux](https://rhugin.r-forge.r-project.org/InstallingRHuginLinux.html).

## Load packages

``` r
library(RSNet)
library(RHugin)
```

## Load a toy dataset

To illustrate the workflow, we use a simulated toy dataset containing
**20 continuous** and **5 discrete variables**, representing a
mixed-type dataset suitable for conditional Gaussian Bayesian network
analysis.

``` r
data("toy_cgbn")
```

## Run and learn an ensemble of networks from resampled datasets

In this example, we use the simulated dataset as input and perform
bootstrap resampling (`boot = TRUE`) with 3 iterations
(`num_iteration = 5`). The column names of the discrete variables must
be specified as a character vector in the `discrete_variable` argument.

To perform **subsampling** instead of **bootstrapping**, set
`boot = FALS`E and specify the sampling proportion using the `sub_ratio`
argument (a value between 0 and 1).

The function
[`ensemble_cgbn()`](https://montilab.github.io/RSNet/reference/ensemble_cgbn.md)
also supports parallel computing.

``` r
ensemble_toy <- ensemble_cgbn(dat = toy_cgbn, # A n x p dataframe
                              discrete_variable = sprintf("D%d",1:5), # Column names of the discreate variables
                              num_iteration = 3, # Number of resampling iteration
                              sample_class = NULL, # Optional: for stratified sampling
                              boot = TRUE, # If FALSE, perform sub-sampling
                              sub_ratio = 1, # Subsampling ratio (0–1)
                              n_cores = 1) # Number of cores for parallel computing
```

## Consensus network construction

The construction of the **consensus network** for conditional Gaussian
Bayesian networks (CGBNs) supports two complementary approaches:

1.  `method = "all"`: Computes the selection frequency of each edge
    (i.e., the proportion of resampling iterations in which the edge is
    identified) with respect to a reference network (typically inferred
    using all samples). The resulting consensus network retains its
    directed structure.

2.  `method = "average"`: Computes the selection frequency of each edge
    based on **Markov blanket** relationships between the two incident
    nodes. The resulting consensus network is undirected, representing
    stable dependency patterns rather than directionality.

``` r
## Directed consensus network (method = "all")
## A simple way to generate a reference network is to set: num_iteration = 1, boot = FALSE, sub_ratio = 1
reference_network <- ensemble_cgbn(dat = toy_cgbn, 
                                   discrete_variable = sprintf("D%d",1:5), 
                                   num_iteration = 1, 
                                   sample_class = NULL, 
                                   boot = FALSE, 
                                   sub_ratio = 1, 
                                   n_cores = 1)

directed_cons_net <- consensus_net_cgbn(ensemble_toy$ig_networks, # A list of igraph objects
                                        reference_network = reference_network$ig_networks$iter_1, # An igraph object
                                        method="all", # Integration method
                                        cut = 0.5) # Edge weight threshold


## Markov blanket-based undirected consensus network, set `method="average" 
undirected_cons_net <- consensus_net_cgbn(ensemble_toy$ig_networks, # A list of igraph objects
                                          reference_network = NULL, # Not required for method = "average"
                                          method="average", # Integration method
                                          cut = 0.5) # Edge weight threshold
```

###
